ROOT AND EPISTEMIC MODAL AUXILIARY VERBS

FEBRUARY 1993

VIRGINIA M. BRENNAN, B.A., YALE UNIVERSITY

M.A., COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY

Ph.D., UNIVERSITY OF MASSACHUSETTS

Directed by: Professor Barbara H. Partee

I argue that English modal auxiliaries have an array of logical types:
they function as sentence operators, as predicates, and as variable
binding operators. Chapter One introduces the root/epistemic distinction
and earlier treatments of it in the literature of generative grammar and
model theoretic semantics. An extensive descriptive section in Chapter Two
establishes precisely the empirical characteristics of the distinction,
which are confined to the semantics. I then account for these
characteristics by positing two semantic types for modal auxiliaries: the
first type is that of a sentence operator and is at work in the
interpretation of modal sentences with an epistemic sense and for those
with a deontic 'ought-to-be' sense; the second type is that of a relation
between a property and an individual and it is at work in the
interpretation of modal sentences expressing ability, disposition, rights
and obligations (traditionally, the root interpretations). The link
between the interpretive class of the modal sentence and the type of the
modal expression in Intensional Logic is not drawn in the lexicon, but is
accounted for by the native speakers' intuitions about what sort of
notions make sense as modal properties and what as modal propositions. In
Chapter Three, I turn to another class of interpretations of modal
sentences, exemplified by the sentence, 'A basketball player can be
short'. After demonstrating that the modal auxiliary functions as a
variable binder in such sentences, I go on to expand the inventory of
types associated with modal auxiliaries to include the type associated
with variable binding operators.



