Morphological Structure and Language Acquisition
May 1982


Janet H. Randall, B.A., SUNY, Binghamton
Directed by: Professor Thomas Roeper


This thesis investigates the system governing complex morphological forms
in English and the way in which this system is acquired. Theories to
account for the constraints on the complementation of derived forms have
been developed by Carlson and Roeper (1980) and Roeper (1981b). In
elaborating and critiquing these theories, we are led to reconsider
morphologically complex items in terms of the operations by which they are
derived, and the "lexical level" at which each of these operations takes
place. In addition, a principle of morphological "Inheritance" is
proposed. This principle determines when a derived form may inherit the
complement structure of its base, given a defined measure of morphological
"distance". Together, the theory of lexical levels and the Inheritence
Principle account for the restrictions on complementation in derived
forms.


The question of how formal linguistic systems are acquired is one which
theories of language acquisition address; the second part of this thesis
examines the morphological proposals in this context. We formulate a
learning model which incorporates the Inheritance Principle and a
particular theory of Universal Grammar for derived morphological forms.
Given this model, we are able to predict the types of overgeneralizations
that learners make and way in which these overgeneralizations are dropped;
i.e. how learners retreat from overly general rules, without access to
negative data.


Systems which integrate linguistic theory, learnability models and
empirical data about children's grammars allow us to develop theories of
language in which issues raised by logical models and experimental
findings can challenge and inform one another. This study is an effort
toward this kind of integration.
